# Higgs Boson Detection

### Abstract—
**At CERN, the direct observation of Higgs bosonsis impossible due to their short life. Instead, one can deter-minate whether a proton collision generates a Higgs boson byanalysing the decay. A good way to process this huge amount ofdata and create a prediction model is to use machine learningtechniques. In this work we present how we build a model thatcombines a least squares regression and a Ridge regularizationin order to best predict whether a given set of data is due tothe creation of a Higgs boson.**

## 1. Introduction
The  Higgs  boson  is  an  elementary  particle  discoveredat  the  Large  Hadron  Collider  at  CERN  in  2013.  In  orderto  produce  it,  physicists  accelerate  protons  and  make  themcollide  at  high  speeds.  In  some  rare  cases,  the  collisiongenerates a Higgs boson. A major problem that arises whenscientists  want  to  observe  the  particle  is  that  its  life  isvery short. Indeed, a Higgs boson quickly decays into otherparticles. For that reason, it is observed indirectly by lookingat  the  outputs  of  the  decay.  However,  this  process  canbecome tricky because a Higgs boson’s decay signature canbe very much alike another particle’s signature.In  this  paper,  a  machine  learning  method  that  efficientlyestimates  the  likelihood  that  a  given  measurement  is  dueto  a  Higgs  boson  or  some  other  particles  is  presented.  Itcombines a least squares method augmented with a polyno-mial basis along with a Ridge regularization.Two  specific  data  sets  are  used  to  optimize  the  method.The  first  setStis  called  the  training  set  and  contains N= 250000 observations. It is used to develop the model.The  second  setSvis  the  validation  set  and  has  568238 events. These data are used to validate the model and makesure  that  we  the  model  does  not  overfit  the  data  ofSt.  Inboth sets, the events are characterized by 30 features. Amongthem,  13  are  ”raw”  quantities  about  the  bunch  collision  asmeasured  by  the  detector  and  17  are  ”derived”  quantitiescomputed  from  the  raw  features,  which  were  selected  bythe physicists. Finally, let’s point out that in some cases thevariables of some entries are not available. In order to handlethe  missing  data,  it  is  primordial  to  apply  a  preprocessingstage.

## 2. Methodology
see report

## 3. Results
For each prediction methods, the training set is split in 2random subsets. The first one has 3/4 of the data and is usedas a proper training set whereas the rest goes into a testingset to avoid overfitting.As a baseline, a simple least together with a polynomial basiswith  different  degrees  and  a  simple  preprocessing  is  used.As it can be seen on Fig.1, it is obvious that the polynomialbasis does not bring much. However, not every polynomialbasis can be used because some basis lead to an unsolvablesolution, that’s the reason why some points are missing onthe figure.  

## 4. Discussion
There  are  few  things  that  can  probably  be  improved  inorder  to  get  better  prediction.  Firstly  MSE  is  not  a  goodcost  function  when  outliers  are  present  which  is  the  casehere. One should thus look for another cost function. Then,least  squares  is  a  pretty  basic  model.  The  next  step  wouldbe  to  use  a  logistic  regression  instead.  However,  we  couldnot manage to make it converge.Regarding   preprocessing,   an   improvement   would   be   toweight  the  features  independently  instead  of  having  themequally  weighted.  Moreover,  there  is  a  feature  which  onlyhas integer numbers. A possible improvement would be notto feed it to the polynomial basis and use this feature directly.Unfortunately, this trick has not shown much improvementon the final score. Finally, when the preprocessing changedfrom  simple  to  complex,  the  whole  optimization  processshould be done again to guarantee the best prediction withthe appropriate hyperparameters

## 5. Summary
In  this  work  we  have  shown  that  one  can  have  a  fairlygood  prediction  using  simple  machine  learning  techniqueslike the least squares regression and the ridge regularizationas long as one takes care of handling the data properly. Wehave  also  highlighted  the  fact  that  in  the  field  of  machinelearning, one should be careful and that some intuition thatseem good a priori yield worse prediction.

[Results can be found here in report pdf](HiggsBoson_detection/report/bazinga-submission.pdf)

